In the week before their departure to Arrakis, when all the final scurrying
    about had reached a nearly unbearable frenzy, an old crone came to visit the
    mother of the boy, Paul.

    It was a warm night at Castle Caladan, and the ancient pile of stone that
    had served the Atreides family as home for twenty-six generations bore that
    cooled-sweat feeling it acquired before a change in the weather.

    The old woman was let in by the side door down the vaulted passage by Paul's
    room and she was allowed a moment to peer in at him where he lay in his bed.

    By the half-light of a suspensor lamp, dimmed and hanging near the floor,
    the awakened boy could see a bulky female shape at his door, standing one
    step ahead of his mother. The old woman was a witch shadow—hair like matted
    spiderwebs, hooded 'round darkness of features, eyes like glittering jewels.

    "Is he not small forhis age, Jessica?" the old woman asked. Her voice
    wheezed and twanged like an untuned baliset.

    Paul's mother answered in her soft contralto: "The Atreides are known to
    start late getting their growth, Your Reverence."

    "So I've heard, so I've heard," wheezed the old woman. "Yet he's already
    fifteen."

    "Yes, Your Reverence."

    "He's awake and listening to us," said the old woman. "Sly little rascal."
    She chuckled. "But royalty has need of slyness. And if he's really the
    Kwisatz Haderach ... well...."

    Within the shadows of his bed, Paul held his eyes open to mere slits. Two
    bird-bright ovals—the eyes of the old woman—seemed to expand and glow as
    they stared into his.

    "Sleep well, you sly little rascal," said the old woman. "Tomorrow you'll
    need all your faculties to meet my gom jabbar."

    And she was gone, pushing his mother out, closing the door with a solid
    thump.

    Paul lay awake wondering: What's a gom jabbar?

    In all the upset during this time of change, the old woman was the strangest
    thing he had seen.

    Your Reverence.

    And the way she called his mother Jessica like a common serving wench
    instead of what she was—a Bene Gesserit Lady, a duke's concubine and mother
    of the ducal heir.

    Is a gom jabbar something of Arrakis I must know before we go there? he
    wondered.

    He mouthed her strange words: Gom jabbar ... Kwisatz Haderach.

    There had been so many things to learn. Arrakis would be a place so
    different from Caladan that Paul's mind whirled with the new knowledge.
    Arrakis—Dune—Desert Planet.

    Thufir Hawat, his father's Master of Assassins, had explained it: their
    mortal enemies, the Harkonnens, had been on Arrakis eighty years, holding
    the planet in quasi-fief under a CHOAM Company contract to mine the
    geriatric spice, melange. Now the Harkonnens were leaving to be replaced by
    the House of Atreides in fief-complete—an apparent victory for the Duke
    Leto. Yet, Hawat had said, this appearance contained the deadliest peril,
    for the Duke Leto was popular among the Great Houses of the Landsraad.

    "A popular man arouses the jealousy of the powerful," Hawat had said.